


Network Working Group                                           J. Abley
Internet-Draft                                                 Dyn, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                   P. Koch
Expires: March 20, 2016                                            DENIC
                                                               A. Durand
                                                                   ICANN
                                                      September 17, 2015


   Problem Statement for the Reservation of Top-Level Domains in the
                   Special-Use Domain Names Registry
              draft-adpkja-dnsop-special-names-problem-00

Abstract

   The dominant protocol for name resolution on the Internet is the
   Domain Name System (DNS).  However, other protocols exist that are
   fundamentally different from the DNS, but which have syntactically-
   similar namespaces.

   When an end-user triggers resolution of a name on a system which
   supports multiple, different protocols for name resolution, it is
   desirable that the protocol to be used is unambiguous, and that
   requests intended for one protocol are not inadvertently addressed
   using another.

   RFC 6761 introduced a framework by which, under certain
   circumstances, a particular domain name could be acknowledged as
   being special.  This framework has been used to make top-level domain
   reservations, that is, particular top-level domains that should not
   be used within the DNS to accommodate parallel use of non-DNS name
   resolution protocols by end-users and avoid the possibility of
   namespace collisions.

   Various challenges have become apparent with this application of the
   guidance provided in RFC 6761.  This document aims to document those
   challenges in the form of a problem statement, to facilitate further
   discussion of potential solutions.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.



Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 20, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






























Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Clear and Specific Guidelines  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Evaluation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Coordination between the IETF and ICANN  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Clear Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Protocol Identifiers in Names  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Separation of Protocol and Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     12.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     12.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  Editorial Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     A.1.   Venue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     A.2.   Pithy Quotes from History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     A.3.   Change History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.3.1.  draft-adpkja-special-names-problem-00  . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17





























Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


1.  Terminology

   Clear and unambiguous use of terminology is important for the clear
   formulation of any problem statement.  The DNS protocol suffers from
   imprecise and overloaded terminology (e.g. see
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-dns-terminology]) without confusing matters further
   with terms and concepts from other naming systems that are similar,
   but different.

   In the interests of clarity, the following terms used in this
   document are to be interpreted as follows:

      Aardvark (n): a medium-sized, burrowing, nocturnal mammal native
      to Africa; the only living species of the order Tubulidentata.
      See <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aardvark>.  This is a
      placeholder.

      Registry (n): the Special-Use Domain Names Registry created by
      [RFC6761] and published at <https://www.iana.org/assignments/
      special-use-domain-names/special-use-domain-names.xhtml>

   [This section to be completed following review and refinement of the
   rest of the text.]




























Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


2.  Introduction

   The dominant protocol for name resolution on the Internet is the
   Domain Name System (DNS), as originally specified in [RFC1034] and
   [RFC1035].  However, other protocols exist that are fundamentally
   different from the DNS, but which have syntactically-similar
   namespaces.

   When an end-user triggers resolution of a name on a system which
   supports multiple, different protocols for name resolution, it is
   desirable that the protocol to be used is unambiguous, and that
   requests intended for one protocol are not inadvertently addressed
   using another.

   [RFC6761] introduced a framework by which, under certain
   circumstances, a particular domain name could be acknowledged as
   being special.  This framework has been used to make a reservation (a
   part of the DNS namespace that should not be used by the DNS
   protocol) to accommodate non-DNS name resolution protocols and to
   avoid the possibility of namespace collisions.

   [RFC6761] describes seven questions which should be considered when
   deciding whether a domain name is special.  Domain names that are
   acknowledged to be special are inserted into the Registry, the
   initial contents of which included 25 entries, four of which were
   top-level domains ("TEST", "LOCALHOST", "INVALID" and "EXAMPLE").
   Since the publication of [RFC6761], the top-level domain names
   "LOCAL" [RFC6762] and "ONION" [I-D.ietf-dnsop-onion-tld] were added.

   While some of the entries in the Registry document the use of a DNS-
   like namespace by non-DNS name resolution protocols (LOCALHOST,
   LOCAL, ONION), other entries are included for different reasons (e.g.
   EXAMPLE.ORG, EXAMPLE.COM and EXAMPLE.NET are reserved for use in
   documentation).

   This document specifically explores the problems in the use of
   [RFC6761] to justify the reservation of top-level domains in the DNS.
   Use of [RFC6761] with reference to other domain names is not
   discussed.












Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


3.  Clear and Specific Guidelines

   [RFC6761] (section 5) describes seven questions to be answered in
   order to provide clear guidance about how and why a particular domain
   name is special.  These seven questions can be broadly categorised as
   follows:

   1.  impact on end-users;

   2.  impact on applications;

   3.  impact on name resolution APIs and libraries;

   4.  impact on recursive resolvers;

   5.  impact on authoritative DNS servers;

   6.  impact on DNS server operators;

   7.  impact on DNS registries and registrars.

   Answers to these seven questions provide guidance to various
   audiences on how to handle a special-use domain name once it has been
   registered.  However, they are inadequate for determining whether a
   particular domain name qualifies as being special and should be
   included in the Registry.

   Experience with the review and ultimate approval of [RFC6762] and
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-onion-tld] has revealed a need for objective criteria
   and a clear process that encourages and facilitates useful
   registrations of top-level domains in the Registry without fear of
   abuse, and with consistent and adequate consideration of all future
   requests.


















Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


4.  Evaluation Process

   [RFC6762] specifies the way in which "an IETF 'Standards Action' or
   'IESG Approval' document" should present answers to the questions
   described in Section 3, but does not describe the process by which
   the answers should be evaluated.

   For example, it is not clear whether the evaluation of a document
   which requests additions to the Registry should be performed by the
   IESG, by the IAB, by the DNSOP working group, by an ad-hoc working
   group, by expert review or any combination of those approaches.

   At the time of writing, the DNSOP working group charter does not
   clearly indicate that DNSOP is the proper venue for the evaluation to
   be carried out, although it also does not prohibit this work taking
   place there.

   As an illustration of the inconsistency that has been observed
   already, [RFC6762] was published as an AD-sponsored individual
   submission in the INT area, and the IESG evaluation record does not
   reveal any discussion of the reservation of the LOCAL top-level
   domain in the DNS; [I-D.ietf-dnsop-onion-tld], however, was published
   as a working group document through DNSOP, and an extensive
   discussion by the IESG on the merits of the request took place.



























Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


5.  Coordination between the IETF and ICANN

   The policy surrounding the implementation and management of top-level
   domains in the DNS has been developed using a multi-stakeholder
   process convened by ICANN.  At the time of writing, the process by
   which most new top-level domains are reviewed includes the ability
   for applications to be rejected on technical grounds; for example, an
   application for "LOCALHOST" would not be approved.

   Whilst discussing the particular attributes that make a domain name
   special, [RFC6761] notes that "the act of defining such a special
   name creates a higher-level protocol rule, above ICANN's management
   of allocatable names on the public Internet."  This declaration may
   well be uncontentious, perhaps accommodated by the technical review
   alluded to above.  However, a clear understanding of the operational
   coordination required to avoid conflicts seems prudent, in the
   interests of maintaining the stability of the naming system as a
   whole and protecting end-users from confusion or harm.

































Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


6.  Clear Expectations

   Each of the seven questions posed by [RFC6761] has the potential to
   expose special handling of particular queries in the DNS by
   particular audiences.  However, it is not clear what any of those
   audiences might reasonably expect as a result of a succesful request
   to add a top-level domain to the Registry.

   For example, reservation of a top-level domain by the IETF does not
   guarantee that queries for names within a reserved domain will not be
   sent over the Internet.  The requirements of the operators of
   recursive resolvers in the DNS cannot be relied upon to be
   implemented; the impact on the operators of DNS authoritative servers
   hence cannot be reliably assumed to be zero.  In the case of
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-onion-tld], leakage of ONION queries on the Internet
   might lead to disclosure of private information that, in some cases,
   might pose a risk to the personal safety of end-users.

   The Registry as published at the time of writing does not include
   direct guidance for any of the seven audiences, relying instead upon
   a reference to a published RFC that might well be opaque to many
   readers ([RFC6762] is a seventy-page protocol specification, for
   example, which is arguably not the most expressive way to set
   expectations of non-technical end-users).

   Useful reservations of top-level domains should be accompanied by the
   existence of realistic expectations of each of the seven audiences,
   and the evaluation of particular requests should consider the
   practical liklihood of those expectations being met and the
   implications if they are not.





















Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


7.  Protocol Identifiers in Names

   At the time of writing, three top-level domain names reserved by
   inclusion in the Registry are used by name resolution protocols other
   than the DNS:

   LOCALHOST  is used to refer to the host on which the name resolution
      takes place, without reference to the DNS;

   LOCAL  is used by the Multicast DNS protocol specified in [RFC6762]
      which is similar in some respects to the DNS, but which uses a
      different well-known port number and is limited to a particular
      multicast scope;

   ONION  is used to construct names that designate anonymous hidden
      services reachable via the Tor network using onion routing.

   The three name resolution protocols described above are different
   from the DNS, and the namespaces used in each naming scheme are also
   different (if similar, in some cases).  The top-level label is hence
   effectively being used as a name resolution protocol identifier.

   The lack of a more elegant way to specify a name resolution protocol
   in (for example) a URI amounts to an architectural problem.  However,
   it is not clear that this is still a problem that can be solved; it
   could be observed that in the absence of a more elegant alternative,
   a pragmatic choice to embed priotocol selectors as namespace tokens
   has effectively already been made.  Although the reservation of names
   in the DNS namespace can be made at any level, the three examples
   above demonstrate use-cases for reservation at the top-level, and
   hence that case must be considered.

   In [RFC2826] the IAB noted that

      To remain a global network, the Internet requires the existence of
      a globally unique public name space.  The DNS name space is a
      hierarchical name space derived from a single, globally unique
      root."

   Maintaining a globally-unique public namespace that supports
   different name resolution protocols is hence an architectural
   requirement, and some facility for reservation of top-level domains
   in the DNS is necessary.








Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


8.  Separation of Protocol and Policy

   [RFC6761] does not address the choice of domain name to be added to
   the Registry when considering a particular case of special-use.

   In the case of LOCALHOST, LOCAL and ONION, use of particular domain
   names was already in use by a substantial population of end-users,
   and the practical cost of a transition perhaps justifies their
   continued use.  However, when formulating a general process for
   future such reservations, prior use of particular names cannot be
   assumed.

   In the case where the technical requirement is for reservation of a
   unique domain name, and not any domain name in particular, the IETF
   should consider whether the choice of name is really a technical
   matter, or a policy decision that is best addressed in other venues.



































Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


9.  Security Considerations

   This document aims to provide a problem statement that will inform
   future work.  Whilst security and privacy are fundamental
   considerations, this document expects that that future work will
   include such analysis, and hence no attempt is made to do so here.













































Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.
















































Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


11.  Acknowledgements

   Your name here, etc.
















































Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, DOI 10.17487/RFC1034, November 1987,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>.

   [RFC6761]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Special-Use Domain Names",
              RFC 6761, DOI 10.17487/RFC6761, February 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6761>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-dns-terminology]
              Hoffman, P., Sullivan, A., and K. Fujiwara, "DNS
              Terminology", draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-terminology-04 (work in
              progress), August 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-onion-tld]
              Appelbaum, J. and A. Muffett, "The .onion Special-Use
              Domain Name", draft-ietf-dnsop-onion-tld-01 (work in
              progress), September 2015.

   [RFC2826]  Internet Architecture Board, "IAB Technical Comment on the
              Unique DNS Root", RFC 2826, DOI 10.17487/RFC2826,
              May 2000, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2826>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.
















Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


Appendix A.  Editorial Notes

   This section (and sub-sections) to be removed prior to publication.

A.1.  Venue

   An appropriate forum for discussion of this draft is the dnsop
   working group.

A.2.  Pithy Quotes from History

      The question has arisen as to how the toplevel naming authority
      decides who gets a toplevel name and who must get by with a non-
      toplevel name.  The suggestion was made by MOCKAPETRIS@USC-ISIF
      that perhaps the existing toplevel nameholders might vote on
      whether the applicant for a new toplevel name should be granted,
      with a majority needed for approval.  It seems to me this might
      produce a clique whereby whoever initially gains power will hold
      it and prevent its "enemies" from getting in too.  This will make
      the toplevel rather less than universal.

   (E-mail from Robert Elton Maas to the namedroppers mailing list on 9
   November 1983)

      My basic point is that as a world-wide network evolves it is
      ridiculous to force people to name resources in terms of one
      static hierarchy which very closely resembles the current
      internetwork topology (as the current scheme does).  What we are
      eventually going to require is a distributed expert for making
      sense out of a name someone hands it.  There will be no simple
      algorithm to be written on one page of an RFC that will suffice to
      resolve a name.  Rather, a number of heuristics will let a
      resolver make sense out of a given name by querying other experts
      which it suspects may be more knowledgeable about the name than it
      is, or by forwarding a piece of mail to an expert which is at
      least one level closer to the destination in some hierarchy.

   (E-mail from Peter Karp to the namedroppers mailing list on 8
   February 1984)

A.3.  Change History

A.3.1.  draft-adpkja-special-names-problem-00

   Initial draft circulated for comment.






Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Top-Level/Special-Use Domain Names     September 2015


Authors' Addresses

   Joe Abley
   Dyn, Inc.
   103-186 Albert Street
   London, ON  N6A 1M1
   Canada

   Phone: +1 519 670 9327
   Email: jabley@dyn.com


   Peter Koch
   DENIC

   Email: pk@denic.de


   Alain Durand
   ICANN

   Email: alain.durand@icann.org





























Abley, et al.            Expires March 20, 2016                [Page 17]

